🔹 1. What Problem Does OAuth Solve?

    Before OAuth, if you wanted one application to access another application’s data on behalf of a user, the only way was:

    👉 The user shares their username and password with the third-party app.

    Example:

    You want an app that prints your Gmail contacts.
    Before OAuth, you’d give your Gmail username + password to that app.
    The app would log in as you and fetch your contacts.

    Problems with this approach:

    The third-party app had full access to your Gmail (emails, settings, everything).
    If the app was hacked, your credentials leaked.
    No way to limit permissions (you can’t say: “only read my contacts, not my emails”).
    No way to revoke just that app’s access — you’d have to change your password everywhere.

    So, OAuth was invented to solve this exact issue:
    ✅ Allow apps to access limited resources on behalf of a user
    ✅ Without sharing the user’s password
    ✅ With granular permission controls
    ✅ With revocable tokens

🔹 2. What is OAuth?

    OAuth (Open Authorization) is a standard protocol that lets an application (client) access resources on another service (resource server) on behalf of the user, without exposing the user’s credentials.
    Instead of sharing a password, you share a token.
    The token defines what can be accessed (scope), and for how long (expiry).
    Users can revoke the token anytime.

🔹 3. Key Roles in OAuth

    Resource Owner – The user who owns the data (e.g., you, the Gmail user).

    Client Application – The app that wants access (e.g., a contact-printing app).

    Resource Server – The API that holds the user’s data (e.g., Google Contacts API).

    Authorization Server – The system that issues tokens (e.g., Google OAuth server).

🔹 4. The General OAuth Flow

    Let’s take the Gmail contacts example:

    Authorization Request

        The client app redirects you to Google’s authorization server.

        You log in to Google and see a consent screen like:
        “This app wants to read your contacts.”

    Authorization Grant

        If you agree, Google sends the app a short-lived code (not your password).

    Token Exchange

        The client app exchanges that code with Google’s server for an access token (and sometimes a refresh token).

    Access Resource

        The client app now uses the access token to fetch your contacts from the Google Contacts API.

    👉 The app never sees your password.
    👉 The token is scoped (e.g., "read contacts only").
    👉 The token expires after some time.

🔹 5. OAuth vs OAuth 2.0

    OAuth 1.0 (2007): Used cryptographic signatures. More complex.

    OAuth 2.0 (2012): Simpler, widely adopted. Uses HTTPS for security instead of signatures.

    Most modern systems use OAuth 2.0 (and extensions like OpenID Connect for authentication).

🔹 6. Types of OAuth 2.0 Flows (a.k.a. Grants)

    Different flows exist for different scenarios:

    1) Authorization Code Grant

        For web & mobile apps.
        Uses an intermediate code before exchanging for a token.
        Most secure (tokens never exposed to browser).

    2) Implicit Grant (deprecated)

        Tokens sent directly via URL hash fragment.
        Used for single-page apps (SPAs).
        Now discouraged (security risks).

    3) Resource Owner Password Credentials Grant (ROPC)

        App directly asks for username + password.
        Legacy, only used in trusted apps.

    4) Client Credentials Grant

        For server-to-server communication (no user).
        Example: A microservice accessing another microservice.

    5) Device Code Grant

        For devices with no browser/keyboard (e.g., smart TV login with a code).

🔹 7. Structure of Tokens

    Tokens are usually JWT (JSON Web Tokens) in modern systems.

    Example JWT Access Token (decoded):

    {
      "iss": "https://accounts.google.com",
      "sub": "1234567890",
      "aud": "client-app-id",
      "scope": "contacts.readonly",
      "exp": 1726502400,
      "iat": 1726498800
    }


    iss = issuer (Google)
    sub = subject (user ID)
    aud = audience (the app)
    scope = what’s allowed
    exp = expiration
    iat = issued at

🔹 8. Access Token vs Refresh Token

    Access Token: Short-lived, used to access APIs.
    Refresh Token: Long-lived, used to get new access tokens without asking the user again.

    Example:

    Access token expires in 1 hour.
    Refresh token lasts 30 days.

    App silently refreshes when access token expires.

🔹 9. Real-World Example

    Suppose you use Spotify and you want to post your "Currently Playing" track to Twitter:

    You click "Connect to Twitter" in Spotify.

    You’re redirected to Twitter’s login and consent screen.

    You approve: “Spotify can post tweets on my behalf.”

    Spotify gets an access token from Twitter.

    Spotify uses that token to call Twitter’s API and post your song.

    If you later revoke access in Twitter settings, Spotify’s token becomes invalid.

🔹 10. Advanced Concepts
    a) PKCE (Proof Key for Code Exchange)

        Improves mobile app security.

        Prevents attackers from stealing the authorization code.

    b) OpenID Connect (OIDC)

        Layer built on top of OAuth 2.0 for authentication.

        OAuth = authorization.

        OIDC = authentication + identity (e.g., "Login with Google").

    c) Scopes & Granularity

    Example:

        contacts.readonly → can only read contacts
        contacts.write → can create contacts
        You can combine multiple scopes.

    d) Revocation & Introspection

        Servers can revoke tokens.

        APIs can check (introspect) if a token is still valid.

    e) Security Best Practices

        Always use HTTPS.
        Use Authorization Code + PKCE for mobile.
        Don’t store refresh tokens insecurely.
        Short token lifetimes, rotate keys.

🔹 11. Analogy to Understand

    Think of OAuth like a valet parking system:
    You (user) own the car (data).
    You give the valet (client app) a valet key (access token), not the full car key (password).
    The valet key only allows limited access (can drive but not open the trunk).
    You can revoke the valet key anytime.

✅ In summary:

    Before OAuth → passwords everywhere (insecure).
    OAuth → tokens + scopes + limited, revocable access.
    OAuth 2.0 → standard in web/mobile APIs.
    With OpenID Connect → also handles login/identity.